RFC: Support for Generic Types and Packs in User-Defined Type Functions (#85)
luau-lang/rfcs: docs/support-for-generic-function-types-in-user-defined-type-functions.md

# Support for Generic Types and Packs in User-Defined Type Functions

## Summary

Add support for generic function types in type functions to allow more types to be accepted by them, including tables and classes which might contain generic function types.

## Motivation

Generic functions are very common in Luau, especially when inferred by the typechecking engine. They are also often present in classes defined by the environment.

Omitting generic types from appearing in type functions limits their use.

> Today, even if there is no direct manipulation of generics, a serialization error appears immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, even if there is no direct manipulation of generics, a serialization error appears immediately for any generic function or class containing them.
```

> Ideally, we want use-defined type functions to support any possible type, aside from temporary implementation-detail types of the type solver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, we want user-defined type functions to support any possible type, aside from temporary implementation-detail types of the type solver.
```

## Design

We will introduce a single 'generic' kind of runtime type for both generic types and generic packs.

While this doesn't match up the typechecking engine representation directly, we avoid having to deal with two different userdata types.

> Being content of a generic type or pack is not known upfront, assigning separate tags is not that different from having an extra property on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the value of a generic type or pack is not known upfront, assigning separate tags is not that different from having an extra property on it.
```

We already have variadic types (`...number`) that get represented as a regular runtime type and only gain that special meaning when placed in a 'tail' spot.

> We also have a different representation of a table with a metatable between type functions and typechecking.

Reviewer: Maybe worth adding something like "These variations were consciously chosen to improve the developer experience for user-defined type functions."

Author: Added a few lines!

Reviewer: Looks good!

Generics are created by specifying a name and a boolean marking it as a type or a pack.
Generics that are coming from type inference might not have a display name, but still hold an auto-generated name internally.

Names are the way generic identity is specified.
Generic types are immutable and two generics with the same name are equal, even if they are defined in different function type scopes.

For example, consider a type `<T, U>(T, U, <T>(T) -> U) -> ()`

From the typechecking perspective, inner and outer function 'T' types are different, but they are still represented by the same runtime generic named 'T'.

The ambiguity is resolved based on the scoping of the generic in question.

> When the runtime type is returned back to the typechecking engine, only those generics that are in the current set of function type generic lists are allowed to be mentioned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the runtime type is returned back to the typechecking engine, only those generics that are in the current set of function type generic lists are allowed to be mentioned. Usage of ill-scoped generics will result in serialization errors.
```

I don't know if this is how you implemented it, but I hope so.

When the inner generic function list places the name 'T' again, it represents a different typechecking type and hides the outer 'T' until the scope of the inner type ends.

> So we can say generics are defined by the lexical scope, which matches how they are written out in source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, generics are defined by their lexical scope, matching how they are written out in source code.
```

```lua
type function pass()
    local T = types.generic("T")
    local Us, Vs = types.generic("U", true), types.generic("V", true)

    local f = types.newfunction()
    f:setparameters({T}, Us);
    f:setreturns({T}, Vs);
    f:setgenerics({T, Us, Vs});
    return f
end

type X = pass<> -- <T, U..., V...>(T, U...) -> (T, V...)
```

Creating a function type with a nested function type that reuses a generic name:

```lua
type function pass()
    local T, U = types.generic("T"), types.generic("U")

    -- <T>(T) -> ()
    local func = types.newfunction({ head = {T} }, {}, {T});

    -- { x: <T>(T) -> (), y: U }
    local tbl = types.newtable({ [types.singleton("x")] = func, [types.singleton("y")] = U })

    -- <T, U>(T, { x: <T>(T) -> (), y: U }) -> ()
    return types.newfunction({ head = {T, tbl} }, {}, {T, U})
end
```

## Updates to the library and type userdata

### `types` Library

| New/Update | Library Functions | Return Type | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| New |  `generic(name: string, ispack: boolean?)` | `type` | returns an immutable instance of a generic type or a pack; name cannot be empty |

> | Update | `newfunction(parameters: { head: {type}?, tail: type? }, returns: { head: {type}?, tail: type? }, generics: {type}?)` | `type` | New `generic` argument is added to specify generic types and packs in a single list |

Reviewer: This is sort of unfortunate parameter ordering, but at the same time, I think it's probably the one we'd pick based on usefulness even if we had generics all along.

Author: Doesn't exactly follow the order we have when writing source code, but making a 3-arg overload with a different order seemed like a path to confusion.

| New | `name()` | `string?` | name of the generic; `nil` for inferred generics |
| New | `ispack()` | `boolean` | `true` if the generic represents a pack, `false` otherwise |

#### Function `type` instance

| New/Update | Instance Methods | Return Type | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| New | `setgenerics({type}?)` | `()` | sets the function's generic types and packs list; types cannot follow a pack |
| New | `generics()` | `{type}` | returns the function's generic types and packs (in that order in the array) |

## Alternatives

We can assign a different `tag` to a generic pack instead of the `ispack` property.

It is also possible to split a single list containing both generic types and packs into two.
This was done in an initial prototype implementation and was inconvenient to specify.
One benefit was that list didn't have to be split manually when reading types or packs individually.

## Drawbacks

Generics do bring additional complexity to type functions, especially with the way we can now hold a generic type pack as a separate item (while `type T = U...` impossible to define in the syntax of the language).

> The way they bring in lexical scoping consideration is also new for type function runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way they bring in lexical scoping considerations is also new for the type function runtime.
```
